# Snap-Saver - Pristine System Rollback

Warning: This is a semi-wicked hack for a very specific usage. YMMV.

The goal is to be able to easily revert back to a pristine system
state for running fresh development deployments in an environment 
where there is limited console access and no other quick provisioning
process is feasible.

The solution should fulfill the following requirements:

* reliable revert back to the pristine state
* simple to implement, configure and maintain
* automatically revert to pristine state on reboot
* easy fallback to disable filesystem overlay

After some research work (we looked heavily at UnionFS/AuFS), using LVM
snapshots was chosen for one simple reason:
It's available on our target systems out-of-the-box.

# LVM Snapshots

## Overview

On system boot (e.g. in the initrd), run the 
following steps:

* call the wrapper script in initrd
* call actual script in the config LV
* delete existing snapshot LVs
* create new snapshot LVs
* let the system continue booting using the snapshots

## Configuration / Control Files

### Configuration FS

The configuration is located in its own LV, rootvg/snap\_saver\_lv.
At runtime, this is mounted to /snap-saver/.

### /snap-saver/snap-saver.rc

This configuration file contains details on the LVs to be preserved.

    snap_saver_lv_list="rootvg:root_lv:1G rootvg:usr_lv:1G"

### /snap-saver/snap-saver-enabled

If this file exists, the snap-saver script creates the snapshots
and renames the LVs so that the snapshots will be used instead
of the original LVs.

During normal operations, this file should exist.

### /snap-saver/snap-saver-disabled

If this file exists, the snap-saver script renames the LVs so 
that the original LVs are back in their original names.

During normal operations, this file should not exist.

### /snap-saver/snap-saver-norefresh

If this file exists, the existing snapshots are not deleted.

During normal operations, this file should not exist.

Note: this file is automatically deleted by the snap-saver.sh
when found. It must be re-created before each reboot where the
snapshot reset should be skipped.

## Implementation Notes

* By default, deletes the existing snapshots, re-creates new
  snapshots and mounts the snapshots instead of the original LVs
* Debug output from boot/80-snap-saver.sh is available in
  /var/log/boot.msg
* The /boot filesystem type 'ext2' is not supported at boot in the
  initrd image (this is why the config is in a separate LV).

### Installation

Installation is very simple--just copy the two scripts to /sbin. Use
the helper script to do this for you:

    sudo ./install.sh

### Initialization

Once installed, the initrd image in /boot must be re-written and the
configuration LV must be created:

    /sbin/snap-adm.sh init

### Scenario 1 - Normal Operations -- Snap-Saver Enabled

The normal mode of operation is set by the following:

    /sbin/snap-adm.sh enable
    sudo /sbin/reboot

On reboot, the snap-saver script will delete the existing snapshots,
if found, create new snapshots and rename the LV names so the snapshots
show up in the place of the originals (e.g. root\_lv\_orig and root\_lv).

The result: at each reboot, the system is returned to the pristine 
state.

### Scenario 2 - Reboot of Test Without Snapshot Reset

If a test must continue after a reboot, the snap-saver needs to
know that it should *not* reset the snapshot to the pristine state.

Skipping the reset is triggered by the following:

    /sbin/snap-adm.sh norefresh

The snap-saver will remove this file as a safety feature to 
allow for a reset in the event that the reboot prevents the
system from booting properly.

### Scenario 3 - Boot without Snap-Saver

In order to apply system updates (e.g. OS patches) to the pristine
system, the snap-saver must be disabled and the original LVs must
be renamed back to their original names. To do this:

    /sbin/snap-adm.sh disable
    sudo /sbin/reboot

## Testing

To test with vagrant, take a look at the vag.mk and Makefile files for two
options.

